# Access control

## What is Access control
Is a constraint to decide who or what is authorized to perform actions or access ressources.
Int the context of web apps:
- **Authentication** confirms the identity
- **Session managment** identifies which subsequent HTTP requests are being made by the same person
- **Access control** determines wheter the user is allowed to carry out the action that they are attempting to perform.
There are different types of access controls:
1. **Vertical access controls**: Mechanisms that restrict access to sensitive functionailty. e.g Admin has other functionalities then a normal user.
2. **Horizontal access controls**: Mechanism that restricts access to ressources to specific users. e.g User 1 can not access User 2 private notebook.
3. **Context dependent access controls**: restricts acces to functionality and ressources based upon  the state of the app. e.g User did a purchase and is not able to change the content of their order.
## How to exploit?
### Vertical privilege escalation

 **Unprotected functionality**:
	 When application does not enforce any protection for sensitive functionality. e.g A normal user can access admin panel by browsing the url. 
	 Links to unprotected functionality can be found in JS code but also in robots.txt
```Javascript
<script> 
var isAdmin = false; 
if (isAdmin) { 
... 
var adminPanelTag = document.createElement('a'); adminPanelTag.setAttribute('https://insecure-website.com/administrator-panel-yb556'); adminPanelTag.innerText = 'Admin panel'; 
... 
} 
</script>
```

**Parameter-based access control methods**:
Applications could store users acces rights or roles during login at user-controllable location.
- A hidden field
- A cookie
- A preset query string parameter
```
https://insecure-website.com/login/home.jsp?admin=true 
https://insecure-website.com/login/home.jsp?role=1

or a response could deliver a hidden field information in json response

{
  "username": "wiener",
  "email": "eee@ee.com",
  "apikey": "BZ7drl0u6QLN5kmyZCTawExueyB4XjoD",
  "roleid": 1 <- Could be changed in request to escelate priv.
}

```

**Broken access control resulting from platform misconfiguration**:
Some Applications enforce access controls at the platform layer resulting in restricting access to specific urls and http methods based on the users role. 
```
DENY: POST, /admin/deleteUser, managers
Rule denies access to POST method url /admin/deleteUser for users in manager group.

What can go wrong?
Some Applications frameworks support non-standart HTTP headers that can be used to override the URL in the original request: X-Original-URL and X-Rewrite-URL

POST / HTTP/1.1 
X-Original-URL: /admin/deleteUser 
...

We could also change the HTTP Method instead of POST -> POTSX which can also bypass circumventions
```

**Broken access control resulting from URL-matching discrepancies**:
Websites can vary in how strictly they match the path of an incoming request to a defined endpoint. 
```
/ADMIN/DELETEUSER == /admin/deleteUser
```
If the access controll is less tolerant it may treat these as two endpoints.
Prior to Spring Boot 5.3 the useSuffixPatternMatch option is enabled by default. This allows files with an arbitrary file extension to be mapped to an equivalent endpoint:
```
/admin/deleteUser.anything == /admin/deleteUser
```

### Horizontal privilege escalation

**Insecure direct object references**:


## Bypass Security Mechanism

## How to prevent?

- Never rely on obfuscation alone for access control.
- Unless a resource is intended to be publicly accessible, deny access by default.
- Wherever possible, use a single application-wide mechanism for enforcing access controls.
- At the code level, make it mandatory for developers to declare the access that is allowed for each resource, and deny access by default.
- Thoroughly audit and test access controls to ensure they work as designed.
